# Day 16
### Jan 12, 2026

[Link to current edition of the game engine repository](https://github.com/SeaweedBrainn/GameEngineProject/tree/f6211aadb90514bc105196975f9bdc403487b0bc)

I implemented textures support, created materials and a basic shader. I refactored a lot of code for the basic shader class so that its easy to implement it. I continued following [BennyBox's tutorial playlist](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLEETnX-uPtBXP_B2yupUKlflXBznWIlL5&si=IXih23VENDWYb3b4) and completed till the #22 video.

<hr />

> ### Texture Support and stb_image.h
I created a Texture class thats gonna use a file path to import textures and save the texture by an ID much like the Shader class. I used the knowledge from [learnopenGL](https://learnopengl.com/Getting-started/Textures) to understand how textures work which is pretty straightforward to understand. To load the texture data I created a new method in the ResourceLoader class and used a newly imported library called "stb_image.h". I used the same conan2 installation method I used with other libraries. <br /?

I modified the Vertex class to hold a third entry for the vertex texture coordinates. I had to modify the mesh class to take the new vertex attribute into consideration and modify the Util::CreateBuffer method as well. 

<hr />

> ### Material Class and Basic Shader
I created a material class which hold the Vector3f color and Texture data for any object. The Texture is saved as a pointer instead of the Texture class itself due to the copy constructor and assignment operator being deleted from the Texture class so you cannot change a texture in a material after the material is created if we had done that. It is a basic wrapper class with just color and texture getting and setting to be used in the Shader. <br />

I created a BasicShader class which inherits from the Shader class. It uses basic vertex and fragment shaders to use a Material. The basic shaders have uniforms for color and transformation matrices, and instead of updating them individually myself in the update loop of the Game class just use a single function that does all that by taking in the transforms and materials.

<hr />

> ### Other small changes
I created an abs() method for the Vector2f and Vector3f classes. I implemented a mouse lock in the Camera class and used it for camera rotation instead of arrow keys. I created a setClearScreen method in the RenderUtil class.



